#  Unravelling key genetic differences between Male and Female Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma

## Introduction 
Kidney cancer is a known cancer type of the urinary system, it is usually originating from renal  tubular epithelium, the rate of kidney cancer incidence was largely increased in recent years as  the number of newly identified cases in the United States has been increased to 65,000 cases  per year which lead to an average of 15,000 deaths annually (according to the most recent  statistics report). Clear cell renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common type of kidney  cancers it is a cortical tumor, it represents about 80% of kidney cancer cases besides it  associated with worst survival rates when compared with other subtypes of kidney cancer as  chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, papillary renal cell carcinoma & collecting duct  carcinoma[1]. It is defined by its malignant epithelial cells, clear cytoplasm & complicated growth  pattern as well as its arborizing vasculature (arranged in nests). 
The name “Clear Cell” indicate the appearance of tumor cells under the microscope (cancer  cells look clear). Although some cancer cells have granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. This type of  cancer occurs when kidney cells increase in number in uncontrolled manner forming a mass. Up  till now, the principal cause of this kind of cancer is unknown, however, certain aggravating  factors associated with its incidence such as smoking, obesity, hypertension, the excessive use  of certain medication, the inherited disorders and germline mutations (the main inherited  disorder is Von Hippel-Lindau “VHL” which happen as a result of a germline mutation in VHL  gene in chromosome 3p25) 
Treatment usually starts with surgery (commonly considered for tumors of size less than 4cm  diameter to remove as much as possible of the tumor mass then it may be followed by either  chemotherapy, biological therapy, radiation or targeted therapy. Recently combination strategies  are largely recommended for the optimization of ccRCC control although the clinical  improvement still with no booming results & about 30% of patients have been suffered from  disease recurrence. Many oncogenic signalling pathways involved in this type of cancer (such  as MAPK, VEGF& mTOR) have been considered as treatment targets but drug resistance &  limited Progression Free Survival (PFS) still challenging, that’s why researchers are still working  for more deep understanding of underlying molecular mechanisms of ccRCC progression & metastasis & still novel targets for treatment are urgently needed[1]. 
Gender-specific analysis done on group of ccRCC patients by different research groups, it was  concluded that the incidence rate of ccRCC in male is greater than female, also, it was found  that males have larger tumor size, higher tumor grade & lower overall survival than female.  Identification of the complete genetic network, hub genes & enrichment analysis of DEGs &  DEMS responsible for this gender-based difference will not only expand our comprehensive  understanding of the differential genomic changes between male & female but also it will help 
researchers to choose the optimum therapeutic strategies to be used & to predict the upcoming  progressive events.
## Methodology 
### Datasets and pre-processing:  
The level 3 RNAseq and miRNASeq data of clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) male and  female samples were collected from the TCGA database. Raw count data and read count data  were used to represent the mRNA and miRNA expression levels, respectively. There were 611  samples in total, these samples were classified into two cohorts: a male group and a female  group, including 352 renal cell carcinomas and 52 normal tissue samples for male cohort, and  186 renal cell carcinomas and 20 normal tissue samples for female cohort. Each sample  included the corresponding miRNA-seq and RNAseq data. The data was obtained from TCGA,  so there was no need for approval by an Ethics Committee. 
### Identification of differentially expressed genes and miRNAs 
Differentially expressed genes and miRNAs were selected based on their log fold change and  adjusted p-values, which were generated by the DESeq package. The inclusion criteria were set  as follows: 1) FDRPadj< 0.05 and | log2(fold change)| > 1; and 2) gene and miRNA expression  level > 0 
### Construction of gene co-expression network 
Hierarchical clustering was done by flashClust package in R, It is the same as hclust but faster.  Because we applied WGCNA to the gene expression data in our analysis, the soft power  threshold of β = 16 was selected, which is the smallest value that reaches level 0.9 on the  independence scale free topology for female cohort. 
### Tfmir2 miRNA-gene network 
TFmiR2 was used to identify the differentially expressed genes and miRNAs. TFmir2 is a web  server used for constructing and analyzing disease-specific co-regulatory networks. The  enrichment p-value threshold and ORA p-value threshold was set to 0.05 to test the regulation  between the differentially expressed miRNAs and their target genes. Visualization of all  networks was performed using Cytoscape 3.7.2 
### Gene Enrichment analysis:  
For gene set enrichment analysis, KEGG pathways and GO functional categories were  identified using the DAVID tool. Briefly, we determined which pathways/functional terms were  annotated to at least one or two genes and were statistically 
overrepresented in the study gene set. GO plot package was used to visualize and annotate  modules with gene ontology GO terms 
### miRNA Enrichment Analysis 
For the enrichment analysis of the miRNAs set, TAM online tool was used. HMDD (human  miRNA disease enrichment analysis) was used for miRNA disease target network. For Gene-
Disease Enrichment, DisGenet (database for gene-disease association) and Clinvar Database  was used as sources for disease-associated miRNAs and genes 
### Network Functional Enrichment Analysis: 
For performing networks functional enrichment  analysis, integration and visualization from public databases using Cytoscape Stringapp. The  resulting network recognized by STRING, interaction evidence score was 0.4 or greater,  functional enrichment was retrieved at p-value 0.05 

## Results: 
### Pipeline Summary 

## Screening of DEGs & DEMs: 
A total 404 male patient samples ( 352 primary tumor samples & 52 solid tissue normal) were  obtained from TCGA & total 206 female samples (186 primary tumor & 20 solid tissue normal)  were obtained from TCGA as well. After doing integrated analysis from genes of male & genes  in female in the RNAseq. data, a total of 606 DEGs from male & 247 DEGS from female where  obtained (using |log10 FC ≥1 and adjusted P value <0.05), including 27 upregulated genes and  579 downregulated genes in male & 12 upregulated genes in female & 235 downregulated genes  in female in ccRCC samples compared to normal samples. Volcano plots were generated to  identify the correlation between DEGs (Figure1), also we get 25 DEMs from male & 29 DEMs  from female. (Figure 2)
    
   
## GO term enrichment analysis of DEGs: 
DAVID website was used to perform GO enrichment analysis to DEGS of male & female (the  analysis includes: BP, CC & MF group). 
For male DEGS: the male DEGs were mainly enriched in multicellular organismal process,  single-multicellular organism process, regulation of biological quality, single-organism transport,  response to stimulus, single-organism transport, single-organism localization, single organism process, establishment of localization, multicellular organism development, single organism cellular process. single-organism, developmental process, biological regulation. Down  regulated DEGs are mainly enriched in plasma membrane, integral to membrane, endoplasmic  reticulum & cytoskeleton, cell fraction, extracellular region & cytosol while up regulated genes  were mainly enriched in plasma membrane, nucleus, Golgi membrane, cytosol, extracellular  region & extracellular space. No significant differences were remarked between up & down  regulated DEGs in their enrichment at MF, as both of them were mainly enriched in protease  binding, nicotinic acid receptor activity, L-glutamate transmembrane transporter activity, protein  binding, actin binding, voltage-gated potassium channel activity, signal transducer activity &  calcium ion binding & voltage gated K channel activity.
For female DEGs: there is no marked differences between up regulated & down regulated  female genes in GO enrichment analysis , female DEGs were mainly enriched in  fatty acid metabolic process, microtubule-based process, carbohydrate transport,  aromatic amino acid family metabolic process, intracellular signaling cascade,  ectoderm development, M phase of mitotic cell cycle, ion transport, response to hypoxia,  immune system development, cell adhesion, transmembrane transport & regarding for CC  female DEGs were mainly enriched in lysosomal membrane, plasma membrane, nucleus,  extracellular region, extracellular space, integral component of membrane & endoplasmic  reticulum membrane & regarding for MF analysis of female DEGS it was found that they are  enriched in transporter activity, protein binding, ATP binding, hydrogen-exporting ATPase  activity, RNA binding, DNA binding & GTPase activity. 
## Pathway enrichment analysis: 
The screened DEGs analyzed using the KEGG pathway- for the full interaction network - (Considering only P values less than 0.05). Male DEGs were enriched in Neuroactive ligand receptor interaction, Retinol metabolism, complement & coagulation cascade, Retinol  metabolism,Xenobiotics metabolism - cytochrome P450, Wnt signaling pathway, cell adhesion  molecule, chemical carcinogenesis & Calcium signaling pathway as shown in Figure 3. While in  female the most enriched pathways were Collecting duct acid secretion, Retinol metabolism,  pentose & glucuronate interconversions Xenobiotics metabolism - cytochrome P450, epithelial  cell .signaling, receptor interaction & chemical carcinogenesis as shown in (Figure 3), From the  results obtained it can be deduced that the most important pathways in male were  Wnt signaling pathway, complement & coagulation cascade & metabolism of xenobiotics.  Whereas the most important pathways in female were Collecting duct acid secretion & Retinol  metabolism. 
  
  
 Figure 3: left: male: right female KEGG pathways 
By performing enrichment analysis of the resulted pathways using Cytoscape STRING to figure  out the correlations between genes & the corresponding pathways, it was identified that ADH1C,  VTN, PROC, CYP2B6 , ADH4 & KNG1 genes were involved in the most important KEGG  pathways in male (Figure 4 ) & ADH1C, ACPP, KCN13, SFRP1, CYP2C9, SLC13A1genes  were involved in more than one pathway in female (Figure 5)
  
Figure 4 
## KEGG pathway Enrichment in Male 
  Figure 5 KEGG pathway Enrichment in Female 
Network construction of DEGs: The Key genes of DEGs (either male or female) & gene  interactions can be identified by using STRING online database, then the results are filtered using Cytoscape software (Figure 6).
 Figure 6: Cytoscape STRING Enrichment 
Enrichment analysis of DEGs & DEMs Using TFmir2: Enrichment analysis for male & female DEMs against DEGs of each one was performed to combine all TF, miRNA & gene co regulatory interaction. We get 229 nodes & 862 edges from the full interaction network & for  Disease interaction network we get 74 nodes & 150 edges from male DEGs &DEMs analysis  (Figure7) after using ORA analysis (of the disease interaction network) we get KEGG pathways  in which male (DEGs & DEMs) are enriched in, downloading the data using DAVID website & visualizing it in R Studio we get the most important KEGG pathways (with P value <0.05) 
These pathways are: Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs),Hippo signaling pathway,  Proteoglycans in cancer,Complement and coagulation cascades,: Pathways in cancer, Melanogenesis, Basal cell carcinoma, Hepatitis C, Wnt signaling pathway, PIK3 -AKT  signaling pathway & Signaling pathways regulating pluripotency of stem cells as shown in  Table (1). By repeating the same steps for female we get only 6 nodes &4edges from the full  interaction network (Figure 8) & we didn’t get disease interaction network in Female 
